= Document 2
:page-role: wide


image::04-r.png[link=self]
image::05-l.png[link=self]
image::05-r.png[link=self]


== Transliteration and Translation

[cols="1a,1a"]
|===
|Transliteration|Translation

|
....
N. C. 4487                            pr. in Cam 11 Oct 1841



                           An
                        Fürstliche Rentkammer
                           Bericht 
     D.                  vom Amte Bückeburg



Num Pr. 1274             
  ad                     
N. C. 438i                   Gesuch des Colons Krückeberg N. 10        
                             in Berenbusch um Anlehnswesens   
                             Betr:

           Auf die anbei zurückerfolgende Bittschrift des Colons
           Kruckeberg N. 10 in Berenbusch verfehlen wir
           nicht Nachfolgendes zu berichten.

           Es hat seine Richtigkeit, dass Hempel Söhne in
           Minden gegen den Supplicanten die Summe von
           133 r 7 mg nebst Zinsen zu 5% vom Jahre 1833
           an welche Schuld von seinen Eltern annoch her-
           rührt, ausgeklagt haben, und ist auf den
           Antrag der Kläger gegen den p. Krückeberg
           auf die genannte Summe und auf 27 mg Centu-
           macialkosten bereits unter 8 v.M die Auspfan-
           dung erkannt worden.

           Nach unserem unvorgreiflichen Dafürhalten
           ist kein Rechtsgrund vorhanden, in Folge dessen
           p. Kruckeberg auf Anordung von Termins-
           zahlungen hinsichtlich eines Theiles der von
           Hempel Söhne ausgeklagten Forderung 
           Anspruch machen könnte, und haben wir die feste
           Überzeugung, daß sich Hempel Söhne, welche in
           dem seit den 30ten Juli 1836 gegen Krücke-
           berg anhängigen, zwei Mal in appellatorio
           und ein Mal in Supplicatorio verhandelten
           Rechtsstreite bedeutende Kosten gehabt haben,
           in keiner Weise dazu verstehen werden, dem
           Colon Krückeberg theilweise eine terminliche
           Abtragung zu gestatten.

           Im Übrigen erscheint es uns nothwendig, daß
           der genannte Colon Krückeberg ein Anlehen
           contrahire, um seine Schuld abtragen zu
           können, und wird er dazu eines Anlehens
           vom 190 rt bedürfen, waren nach Abtragung
           der Schuld nur ein kleiner Rest übrig bleiben
           wird, welchen er zur Deckung der auf seiner
           Seite erwachsenen Proceßkosten mit ver-
           wenden mag.

           Die zur Stätte des Colons Krückeberg N 10.
           in Berenbusch gehörigen Landereien sind 10
           Morgen 30 Ruthen groß und sind die Hofs-
           gebäude zu 525 rt assecurirt. An unseren-
           tirten Schulden haften auf der genannten
           Stätte 700 r.

           Für ein Anlehen von 190 rt würde dem
           nach die Stätte das p Krückeberg nach hinreichende
           Sicherheit gewähren.

           Aus Grund des Vorgetragenen stellen wir den
           unterthänigsten Antrag: den Colon Krückeberg
           durch uns auf seine Vorstellung dahin beschei-
           den lassen zu wollen, daß sein Gesuch, einen
           Theil der Forderung der Hämpel Söhne
           in Minden terminlich abtragen zu dürfen,
           nicht statt finden könne, ihm jedoch gestattet
           werden solle, behuf Berichtigung solcher For-
           derung ein Anlehen von 190 rt aufzunehmen.

           Schließlich bemerken wir noch, daß wir die
           Vollziehung der gegen Krückeberg erkannten
           Auspfandung einstweilen sistirt haben
           Bückeburg den 7t October 1841.

           Hauck N Neuhsel, Yöcker[Jöcker]

           Rl. rescrib: Das Amt habe
           wie angetragen den
           Krückeberg zu bescheiden.
           B. 14. Oct. 1841

           Spring




           vorl.[?]
....

|
[verse]
____
Chamber registry no. 4487; presented in the Chamber on 11 Oct 1841.

Protocol no. 1274; with reference to Chamber file no. 438i.

To the Princely Rent Chamber
Report from the Amt of Bückeburg

Regarding: Petition of the colon (farmholder) Krückeberg No. 10
in Berenbusch concerning a loan.

On the attached petition by Colon Krückeberg No. 10 in Berenbusch
we report as follows.

It is correct that Hempel & Sons in Minden have sued the
petitioner for the amount of 133 rthl 7 Mariengroschen plus 5%
interest accruing since the year 1833 for a debt that still stems
from his parents, and that—at the plaintiffs’ request—distraint
has already been ordered against Krückeberg for that sum and for
27 mg in percentage-based court costs.

In our provisional, non-prejudicial opinion there is no legal
basis on which the petitioner could claim the scheduling of
installment payments with respect to part of the claim brought by
Hempel & Sons. We are firmly convinced that Hempel & Sons—who, in
the lawsuit pending since 30 July 1836 against Krückeberg, have
conducted proceedings twice in appellate session and once in
supplicatory session and have thereby incurred considerable
costs—will in no way agree to permit Colon Krückeberg a partial
installment plan.

Apart from this, we consider it necessary that the said Colon
Krückeberg take out a loan in order to pay down his debt; for
this he will need a loan of 190 rthl. After payment of the debt
only a small remainder will be left, which he may use to cover
the litigation costs incurred on his side.

The lands belonging to the holding (Stätte) of Colon Krückeberg
No. 10 in Berenbusch comprise 10 Morgen 30 Ruthen, and the farm
buildings are insured for 525 rthl. Inventoried debts attached to
the said holding amount to 700 rthl.

A loan of 190 rthl would, upon provision of sufficient security
on the holding of the petitioner Krückeberg in Berenbusch, be
grantable.

On the basis of the foregoing we submit the most humble request
that Colon Krückeberg, upon his petition, be informed that his
request to be allowed to pay part of the claim of Hempel & Sons
in Minden by installments cannot be approved; however, he may be
permitted to take out a loan of 190 rthl for the settlement of
that claim.

Finally, we note that we have temporarily stayed execution of the
distraint ordered against Krückeberg.  Bückeburg, 7 October 1841.

Hauck – Neuhsel – Jöcker

Rescript: The Amt shall, as requested, notify Krückeberg.
B[ückeburg], 14 Oct. 1841.
Spring



provisional
____
|===

== Glossary

*N. C.*:: Rent Chamber registry/file number (likely *Numero Cammeral(e)* = “Chamber no.”). Used to track the case in the Rentkammer register.

*pr. in Cam*:: *praesentiert in Cammer* — “presented in the Chamber.” A filing/receipt date line in the header.

*Num Pr.*:: Protocol number of the outgoing report from the Amt (Amt’s register no.; *Numerus Protocolli*).

*ad*:: Latin “with reference to / regarding.” Points to another file number (e.g., *ad N. C. 438i*).

*An — Fürstliche Rentkammer — Bericht — vom Amte Bückeburg*:: Address line: “To the Princely Rent Chamber — Report — from the Amt (office) of Bückeburg.”

*B. (before a date in the margin)*:: Abbrev. for **Bückeburg** (place of issuance of the marginal rescript/date).

*Res., rescrib.*:: *Rescriptum / rescribatur* — marginal order/instruction (“rescript”). Here: an order to the Amt on how to proceed.

*Betr.*:: *Betreff* — “subject.”

*p. (before a person’s name)*:: *Petent* (the petitioner/supplicant in the matter).

*Colon*:: Status/title of a farmholder on a “Stätte” (hereditary/tenure farm within a colonization estate). Not “colonel.”

*Stätte*:: The homestead/holding (the farm property unit), not just any “place.”

*Morgen / Ruthen*:: Historical land measures (regionally variable). Morgen ≈ 0.25–0.36 ha depending on locality; *Ruthe/Ruthe(n)* is a subunit.

*r / rt / rthl.*:: **Reichsthaler** (currency). Spelled variously in the manuscript (rt., rthl., r.).

*mg*:: **Mariengroschen** (small coin unit).

*appellatorio / supplicatorio*:: Latin adverbs marking procedural stages: in appellate session / upon supplication (special petitionary procedure).

*unvorgreiflich(es Dafürhalten)*:: “without prejudice; provisional view/opinion.” Standard hedge in official writing of the period.

*Terminszahlungen*:: Court-scheduled installment payments (payments set by term).

*Auspfandung*:: Distraint/seizure (execution on property).

*sistirt*:: Stayed/suspended (execution or proceedings temporarily put on hold).

*assecurirt*:: 19th-cent. spelling of **assekuriert** (“insured”). In context: “the farm buildings are insured for 525 rthl.”

*Centumacialkosten*:: Percentage-based (ad valorem) court costs/fees (literally “hundred-rate” costs).

*contrahire*:: (ein Anlehen) contrahiren — to enter into/contract (a loan).

*N. (as in N. 10)*:: **Numero/Nummer** — “No.” (farm/holding number within the locality).

*v.M. (e.g., „unter 8 v.M.“)*:: **vorigen Monats** — “on the 8th of the previous month.” Common date shorthand in decisions or orders.

*Supplicant / Supplicanten*:: Petitioner; person submitting the plea/petition.

*Anlehen / Anlehens (gen.)*:: Loan / of a loan.

*Stätte … assecurirt … haften*:: Standard collateral description: the holding (Stätte), insured value (assecurirt), and debts that “attach” (haften) to the holding.

